Action for Autism (AFA) is an Indian non-profit, education, training and advocacy organisation which provides support and services to persons with autism and those who work with them. Founded in 1991, AFA is the parent organisation began with the goal to "put autism on the Indian map." Awareness of autism in India has grown tremendously in the past decade, and AFA's activities have also changed to meet current needs in India. AFA works through direct services, advocacy, and research to improve the lives of children with autism and their families. AFA is an Indian organisation, and its efforts are focused on the needs of those in India. AFA is also committed to assisting other countries in South Asia achieve legal recognition of autism and develop services for children and families. To more effectively orchestrate national activities for autism, it was relocated to the AFA National Centre for Advocacy Research and Training in 2006.

Vision and mission 

A society that views the interdependence of people of every ability as valuable and enriching and seeks to provide equal opportunities for all.

To facilitate a barrier free environment; to enable the empowerment of persons with autism and their families; and to act as a catalyst for change that will enable persons with autism to live as fully participating members of the community.

AFA's guiding philosophy is that every person with autism, given proper training, guidance and resources, has the capability and the potential to contribute and live as a productive member of the community.

Programmes and services of AFA

Assessment 

Diagnostic Assessments, Functional Skills Assessments, Occupational Skills Assessments

Intervention 

The Open Door Day Programme, Parent Child Training Programme, Educational Intervention Programme, Inclusive Education Facilitation & Support, Social Communication Programme-Bubbles, Inclusive co-curricular activities, Centre based programme for Home management, Extended programme for outstation families, Occupational and Sensory Intervention, Hand writing programme

Programmes for adults 

Vocational & Living Skills Building centre -AADHAAR, On the job training for Work Behaviors, Friendship Club,

Family support services 

Family Counseling, Weekend Respite, Holiday Camp

Anvay Research and Trainings 

Research, professional development programme, short trainings, resource library.

Aahaan Publications 

The Autism Network Journal, training manuals

Aailaan Centre for Advocacy 

Awareness raising, self-advocacy, lobbying, networking and partnerships

See also
 Autism therapies
 Aapki Antara

References
 Understanding Autism
 'Best thing that happened to autism'
  Autism - the challenges ahead
  Artistic eminence in the service of a cause
  Autism - the challenges ahead
 Tackling autism

1991 establishments in Delhi
Autism-related organisations in India
Organizations established in 1991