The Afula bus suicide bombing was the suicide bombing attack that was carried out on April 6, 1994, at a bus stop next to an Egged bus in the center of Afula, Israel. Eight Israeli civilians were killed in the attack and 55 additional people were injured. Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack, as did Islamic Jihad.

The Afula bus suicide bombing was the first suicide bombing attack to be carried out by Palestinian militants against Israeli civilians in Israel, and was carried out in retaliation for the killing by a settler of 29 Muslims while they were at prayer in the Ibrahimi mosque in Hebron on February 25.

Preparations for the attack 

The Afula bus suicide bombing attack was planned by Hamas chief bombmaker Yahya Ayyash, who began to plan suicide bombings within Israel in 1992.

Ayyash rigged a 1987 Opel Ascona with seven gas cylinders, five anti-personnel hand grenades, and wrapped the bomb in a rucksack containing 1,100 carpenter nails. A caller to a Western news agency in Jerusalem said the car was carrying 385 pounds of explosives. The car, which had Israeli license plates that did not belong to it, had been stolen in Tel Aviv on March 23.

The attack 

Around 12:10 pm, during the Holocaust Memorial Day, a Palestinian suicide bomber drove a vehicle full of explosives into the division nine street in downtown Afula. Two nearby schools had just ended classes for the day, and young Jewish students streamed toward the approaching bus for home.

The suicide bomber stopped his vehicle next to an Egged commuter bus line number 348 and detonated the explosives device as the bus was boarding passengers at the bus stop, which was crowded with people. Witnesses described a horrible scene. A firefighter who was the first on the scene said that the street was covered with oil, seared metal and nails. A 23-year-old survivor who had been reading a newspaper about the on-going Oslo peace negotiations saw "a big rolling fire." He ran away, ripping off his burning clothes as he went. An ambulance driver reported that "people were charred, lacking limbs, lacking heads... ."  Tree branches were ripped off and windows were shattered at a nearby kindergarten.

Among the mostly Jewish victims were several Arabs, including one of the fatalities.

The perpetrators
A few hours after the blast, Hamas issued a communique stating that the bombing was carried out by a 19-year-old Palestinian named Ra'id Zaqarna, who originated from the village of Qabatya in the West Bank and who was a member of the Abdel el-Rahman Hamadan militant cell of the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades. Zaqarna drove to the intersection of Afula's 9th Brigade (Hativa Tesha) street, and pulled in front of the #348 bus. As a group of Israeli students boarded the bus, Zaqarna detonated the bomb. Israeli media reports said that he had previously served time in prison and was on an Israeli army list of fugitive members of Hamas's extremist armed wing. Police said they found a banner denouncing the Oslo peace process, and a Koran, the Islamic holy book, near the debris of the car.

Motivation
Hamas publicly declared that the attack was one of 5 planned to retaliate for the Cave of the Patriarchs massacre in which the Hebron settler Baruch Goldstein machine-gunned 29 Muslims at prayer and wounded a further 125. Hamas, after conducting a second  attack on April 13, the Hadera bus station suicide bombing, Hamas desisted from undertaking the other three it had planned, when Israel quickened its schedule for withdrawing its military from the Gaza Strip soon after.

However, the Hebron attack may have been an excuse, not a reason. Hamas, whose charter calls for the destruction of Israel, opposed the Oslo peace talks, which were underway in Cairo at that time.

See also
 Palestinian political violence
 Afula ax attack

External links 
 FM Peres reaction to Afula attack - 06-Apr-94 – published at the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs
 Incident at Afula – published on The Washington Post on April 7, 1994
 Arab car bomber kills 8 in Israel; 44 are wounded – published on The New York Times on April 7, 1994
 Arafat declines to condemn attack – published on The Jerusalem Post on April 7, 1994
 Us Urges Arafat To Condemn Blast – published on the Milwaukee Sentinel on April 7, 1994
 Israelis' Faith In Peace Is Put Under Strain by Bombing and New Attack – published on The New York Times on April 8, 1994

Footnotes
The first suicide car bomb attack took place at the Mehola Junction bombing in the West Bank on April 16, 1993. "A year later, on April 6, 1994, Hamas carried out its first successful suicide car bomb attack in Israel proper when a car packed with nearly 400 pounds of explosives detonated beside a bus picking up students in the Israeli town of Afula ..."

References

Explosions in 1994
Mass murder in 1994
Hamas suicide bombings of buses
1994 crimes in Israel
Car and truck bombings in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict
Suicide car and truck bombings in Israel
Islamic terrorist incidents in 1994
1994 murders in Asia
1990s murders in Israel
Terrorist incidents in Israel in 1994
Islamic terrorism in Israel