Agoraphobia without a history of panic disorder (also called primary agoraphobia) is an anxiety disorder where the sufferer does not meet the DSM-5 criteria for panic disorder.

Agoraphobia typically develops as a result of having panic disorder.  In a small minority of cases, however, agoraphobia can develop by itself without being triggered by the onset of panic attacks. Agoraphobia can be caused by traumatic experiences, such as bullying or abuse.  Historically, there has been debate over whether agoraphobia without panic genuinely existed, or whether it was simply a manifestation of other disorders such as panic disorder, general anxiety disorder, avoidant personality disorder and social phobia.  One researcher said:  "out of 41 agoraphobics seen (at a clinic) during a period of 1 year, only 1 fit the diagnosis of agoraphobia without panic attacks, and even this particular classification was questionable...Do not expect to see too many agoraphobics without panic".  In spite of this earlier skepticism, current thinking is that agoraphobia without panic disorder is indeed a valid, unique illness which has gone largely unnoticed, since its sufferers are far less likely to seek clinical treatment.

Diagnostic criteria (DSM-IV-TR)
According to the DSM-IV-TR, a widely used manual for diagnosing mental disorders, the condition is diagnosed when agoraphobia is present without panic disorder where symptoms are not caused by or are unreasonable to an underlying medical problem or pharmacological influence.

See also
Panic disorder
Agoraphobia

References 

 Spiti Raffaello, Scarpato Maria Alessandra, Spiti Alessandra (2011). "Primary agoraphobia specific symptoms: from natural information to mental representations". Italian Journal of Psychopathology, 17 (3): 265-276.http://www.gipsicopatol.it/issues/2011/vol17-3/02Spiti.pdf
 Agoraphobia Without a History or Panic Disorder May Be Part of the Panic Disorder Syndrome. Journal of Nervous & Mental Disease, 190(9):624-630, September 2002.
The Relationship of Agoraphobia and Panic in a Community Sample of Adolescents and Young Adults.

External links

Anxiety Disorders Association of America Information for families, clinicians & researchers
 Anxiety Disorders Association of Canada Registered Canadian non-profit organization, promotes prevention, treatment & management of anxiety disorders
ANXIETY UK (Formerly the National Phobics Society) Nationally registered charity in the UK; provides information, support & understanding
The Phobic Trust (Of New Zealand) Registered charitable trust in New Zealand; provides information about treatment, education & support to anxiety disorder sufferers
South African Depression and Anxiety group (National Charity) Counseling, mental health awareness programs: media & public speaking outreach & rural outreach initiatives 
 
 Self help guide (NHS Direct)

without