Duet Mania () is a Bulgarian pop duet formed in Sofia, Bulgaria in 1999 and consisting of two sisters: Daniela Atanasova and Julia Dimitrova.

Duet Mania members began their musical endeavors in their pre-teens in their home town Dimitrovgrad, Bulgaria, as members of a children choir called "Happy Childhood" and as lead vocalists of a band called "Sparkles". After years of performing underground they were signed to "PolySound" as Duet Mania.
In 1999 they released their first best-selling album called It's Not True, which contained the number one singles "The World is For Two", "Cricket's Song", "It's Not True", "I Don't Want, I Can't".
The album went on to become a critical and commercial success, with estimated sales of more than 50 thousand. They are the most successful Bulgarian female duet in the history of pop music, topping the charts all over the country from 1999 to present
All the songs from the album became part of the series hit-song compilations of "PolySound" called Club Attack. In the year of 2000 Duet Mania was pronounced "Best Bulgarian Pop Duet", by "Art Rock Center".

In 2001 the song "I Don't Want, I Can't" became hit song of the  compilation "Love songs for loved people".
Their second album Cold Eyes, released in 2003 was produced by the sisters, released by Select Music
and distributed by Stefko's Music. The album contained the hit songs "Cold Eyes", "Forever in Love" and "Signs of Love". "Forever in Love" was pronounced “Golden Hit” of Planeta TV in 2003. In 2005 after taking a short break Daniela and Julia released the single "Whatcha Waiting For", written by Ivan Dinev and Simeon Somlev, followed by the single "Bitter-sweet", written for the most prestigious song contest in Europe, the Eurovision Song Contest. Duet Mania's performance on Eurovision brought them popularity all over Europe.

In 2007 they released "I Didn't Know You".

The sisters had worked with the most famous Bulgarian artists - Lili Ivanova, Vasil Naydenov, B.T.R., Tonika, Orlin Goranov, , , , Margarita Hranova, Yordanka Hristova, ,  and Ilia Angelov. They had recorded background vocals for , Kamelia Todorova, Petia Buiuklieva and Ilia Angelov. They were invited by the diva of the Bulgarian pop music Lili Ivanova to open her concert in 2003, attended by her close friend Jean-Claude Van Damme. In the year of 2000 during their Macedonian tour, they opened a concert for the Serbian star Zeljko Samardzic. In the summer of 2011 they were the opening act for ABBA at a private event in Bulgaria. Daniela and Julia had been touring all over the world
and had captured the hearts of millions of fans in Norway, Germany, Denmark, Russia, Cyprus, Israel, Egypt, Czech Republic, England, Ireland, Switzerland, Macedonia, China, South Korea, United States.  In April 2007, Julia and her husband Emil Dimitrov welcomed their first child, Vanesa Dimitrova. The same year Daniela married the former pianist of the band , Ivelin Atanasov and the couple moved to New York City.

Early life
Daniela and Julia were born and raised in a small town situated in the south part of Bulgaria, called Dimitrovgrad
They grew up in a musician's family. Their father is a guitarist and a singer. He was the one who inspired the girls to start singing from an early age. Their grandmother was a singer and their grandfather was a kaval player. Their mother is a former model and an artist. 
They both attended PMG Ivan Vazov high school.
 
At the age of 11 and 13 Julia and Daniela started singing in a choir called "Happy Childhood". They were part of many music festivals and competitions around the country and they always came back with the 1st prize. At the same age Julia and Daniela influenced by the movie “Heavenly Bodies” fell in love with the aerobics and in 2003 they became certified aerobics and fitness instructors. In high school they became lead singers of a band called Sparkles. When the sisters graduated high school one after another became lead singers of their father's band Consonance.

Music career

Duet Mania was created in 1999, by the Bulgarian music producer Valio Markov, "PolySound". 
Until 1999 both of the sisters were performing solo.
Daniela graduated the National Academy of Music with pop and jazz singing in the class of prof. 
and studied saxophone in the class of prof. Vlaio Vlaev. Julia took singing lessons from Stefka Onikian. 
The sisters started singing together in 1998 as lead singers of the band "Step on fire". They signed a contract with the Norwegian music agency “Ram” and they started singing on the cruise ships of the cruise company Color line, travelling from Norway to Denmark and Germany. In 1999 Daniela and Julia participated in the International Music Festival for Young Talents “Melfest”, Macedonia with the song When you believe and won 1st prize. Their debut song "The World is For Two", brought them huge success. The song is a cover of a Bulgarian old hit song, originally recorded by Orlin Goranov. The second song they recorded, "Cricket’s song"
became their second big hit. It's another cover song, originally recorded by Roksana Beleva. Their 1st original song “It’s not true”,
became a popular hit, too. But the single “I don’t want, I can’t”
brought them the biggest success. The song became a Golden Hit of  and it was part of two CD compilations – “Club Attack” and “Love songs for loved people”. “I don’t want, I can’t” is considered a Bulgarian evergreen song. Their 1st album “It’s not true” was released in October, 1999.
In the year of 2000 they were pronounced "Best Duet of 2000" by “Art Rock Center”, Bulgaria. The same year the sisters participated in the "World Championships of Performing Arts" held in Los Angeles, CA and grabbed the 1st prize and the gold with the song “When you believe” in the category for female pop duet.
During the event the sisters were noticed by representatives of some record labels, TV-commercials production companies, model agencies who were interested working with them and who offered them contracts starting in September, 2001. On September 11, 2001 the World Trade Center in New York City was destroyed by terrorists and many people lost their lives. The tragedy prevented the sisters from returning to America and the desire of pursuing their dreams there was deeply buried. The same year the girls created a Las Vegas style show and named it “Shake Mania”. The show was created especially for the cruise company Color Line. In 2003, Daniela and Julia were invited to participate in the “International Folk Song and Arts Festival” held in Nanning, China. They had 10 outdoor concerts and one in "Nanning Theater". They were on the Chinese newspapers and on TV. More than 16 million people became familiar with duet Mania and their music.

 
In November, 2003 the sisters released their 2nd album “Cold Eyes”. Famous songs became “Forever in love”,
nominated as a Golden hit of Planeta TV, “Cold eyes”
and “Signs of love”.
In 2004 Daniela and Julia were invited to take part in another International festival “Meet in Beijing”, China. They performed with a popular Bulgarian rock group called B.T.R.
The same year they participated in the International Music Song Contest “Universetalent”,
held in Prague, Czech Republic where they won 3rd prize with the song “Cold eyes”.
In 2005 the sisters took a new challenge. In 2005 after taking a short break Daniela and Julia released the single “Whatcha waiting for” with the idea to participate in one of the biggest European Song Contests "Eurovision". But their manager Stefan Shirokov asked them to participate with another song, “Bitter-sweet”, written by Georgi Gogow, violinist and bassist of the German rock band “City”. The song was written especially for the contest. Their performance on "Eurovision" brought them popularity all over Europe and they had conquered the hearts of millions of fans. 
The same year they participated in another Music Festival, “Discovery” held in Varna, Bulgaria.
They received the award for “Best Performance”. The same year they signed a contract with a Korean Music Agency and they went to perform in Seoul, South Korea. In 2006 Daniela and Julia were invited to participate in “Blues to Bob Festival” held in Lugano, Switzerland where they performed with Angel Zaberski – piano, Ivelin Atanasov – piano, Mitko Shanov – bass, Mitko Semov – drums, and the Bulgarian Frank Sinatra, Vasil Petrov. 
The same year they were guest singers of the International “Jazz Festival Bansko” where they performed with Ivelin Atanasov – piano, Radoslav Slavchev – bass, Stoyan Koprinkov – drums, Kiril Tashkov – guitar.
In 2007 the sisters recorded a new single “I didn’t know you”,
written by Magomed Aliev-Maga and shot the video of the song.
The same year Daniela's boyfriend, the former pianist of the band "”, Ivelin Atanasov won a Green Card and proposed Daniela.
They were married and moved to New York City.
Since 2008 the sisters have been touring mostly in United States. 
In the summer of 2009 Duet Mania is invited to sing on board of the cruise line ship M/S Julia travelling from Cork, Ireland to Swansea, Wales.
In 2014 Daniela leavesNew York and moves back to Bulgaria for good. The sisters get together again which speeds up their music career growth. The same year they record the single “Hiliadi vaprosi” written and arranged by Stamen Yanev, lyrics by Geri Turiiska. 
In 2015 is released DJ Diass’ remix of their biggest hit “Ne iskam, ne moga”. The same year they are invited by Ruse's Philharmonic  to become a part of a series of concerts “ABBA Tribute”. Daniela and Julia  perform with Ruse's Philharmonic and the conductor Dimitar Kosev as they present together “ABBA Tribute” in Ruse, Silistra and Popovo, where they make the audience stand up multiple times. 
In 2016 the sisters release many singles. The first one is  “Whatcha waiting for”, the remix of the song, recorded by them in 2005,  especially for the European Song Contest „Eurovision“, written by Ivan Dinev, arranged by Svetlin Kaslev, lyrics by Krum Georgiev. The next single is “Parva sreshta” with the special featuring of the rapper Julias Celestin written and arranged by Aleksander Kostov, lyrics by Valentina Cenova. The same year the director of the International Music Festival „Discovery“, Dono Tzvetkov writes for them  two songs – the Christmas song “Biala prikazka” and the song “Ako dal si nadejda”, recorded together with the children vocal group “Da”. “Biala prikazka” becomes a part of the Christmas album “Prikazka srebarnobiala”, and “Ako dal si nadejda” becomes a part of the album “Valshebnici”. 
In 2016, 2017 and 2018 Duet Mania  is a special guest of the International Music Festival „Discovery“ held in Varna. 
In June 2017 the sisters are pronounced “Artists of the week” by Market Radio. The same year is released the single “Formata” written and arranged by Daniela's husband Ivelin Atanasov and lyrics by Daniela Petkova, provoked by iniquity in the music business  in Bulgaria, the attitude of the media towards Bulgarian pop artists and a single case in which the duet becomes a victim of a fraud by a man part of the rapper's guild. The same year they sing on board of a cruise line ship of the Finland company “Viking Line”  - M/S Amorella, travelling to Finland and Sweden, performing with the band “Groove Connection”. In 2017 Daniela and Julia are for the first time on the stage of the Music Festival   „Burgas I moreto “ held in Burgas performing the song “Pareshti sledi” written and arranged by Stamen Yanev, lyrics by Valentina Cenova. The same year sisters release the single “Tvoia biah” written and arranged by Aleksander Kostov, lyrics by Valentina Cenova. 
In 2018 they perform on stage of the Summer theater in Varna at the Holiday concert organized by district “Primorski”. In June, the same year, the sisters are pronounced “Best duet of 2018” by the 21-st Awards For Fashion, Style and Show Business held in Varna. In the summer of 2018 they release the single “Sabudi me” which music and lyrics are written by Daniela Petkova and the song is arranged by Jivko Vasilev, provoked by the breakup of the marriage of Daniela and her husband.

Artistry

Influences
The sisters were influenced by Mariah Carey, Whitney Houston, Aretha Franklin, Chaka Khan, Celine Dion, Tina Turner, Gladys Knight, Patti LaBelle, Donna Summer, Michael Jackson, Kool & The Gang, Destiny's Child, Christina Aguilera, Beyoncé and Pink.

Daniela was influenced by the saxophonists – Michael Brecker, Kenny G, Candy Dulfer, David Sanborn, John Coltrane, Eric Marienthal.

Legacy

Duet Mania is compared to ABBA and Destiny's Child.

“The ladies of Mania are an amazing singing duet. Full of beauty, talent and grace their voices soothe any room they perform in…couple that with their instrumental talents and you have a dynamic duo. One of the best things imported out of Bulgaria.”
Michael Cory Davis – actor and filmmaker

Daniela and Julia are very beautiful and very talented. They have remarkable voices and when Dani plays the saxophone...that makes their performance extremely sexy.”
Sam Krumov, CNN World Sport Producer

“It’s not only the beauty and the talent, that the sisters have… It’s the magic that they bring on stage with their presence and energy.”
Ivelin Atanasov, musician

“Every time they are on stage they sing their hearts out…”
Ben Cross, actor

Personal life

Family

Daniela married Ivelin Atanasov, the former pianist of the band “Latin Partizans” in 2007.
Julia married Emil Dimitrov in 2002. The couple welcomed their first child, Vanesa in April, 2007.

Activism and charity work

The sisters were financially supporting an orphanage located in Panagyurishte, Bulgaria.
Daniela shared: “I would never forget how I wrote 55 Christmas card wishes for the kids. Every card kept a different message, because I wanted each and every one of them to feel special. We threw a concert for them. We brought them a huge cake with all their favorite sugar heroes on top. I would never forget how happy their faces were…”
In 2000 the sisters were part of a series charity concerts "Against AIDS".
In 2006 the girls were part of a charity concert held at the National Palace of Culture "Say No To Drugs".
In February 2012 Daniela and Julia sang at a fund raising event for "Cycle for Survival" in support of research at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center on rare and underfunded cancers.

Filmography

Discography

Studio albums
1999: It's Not True (Не е истина)
2003: Cold Eyes (Хладни очи)

Singles
1999: "The World is For Two"
1999: "Cricket's Song"
1999: "It's Not True"
1999: "I Don't Want, I Can't"
2003: "Cold Eyes"
2003: "Forever in Love"
2003: "Signs of Love"
2005: "Whatcha Waiting For"
2005: "Bitter-Sweet"
2007: "I Didn't Know You"

Awards and nominations
 1996 – International Song Festival, Golden Orpheus, Bulgaria – 2nd prize
 1999 – International festival for young talents - Melfest, Macedonia – 1st prize
 2000 – World Championships of Performing arts, Los Angeles, CA – 1st prize and gold medal
 2000 – Art Rock Center, Sofia, Bulgaria - Best duet of 2000
 2003 – The Spring Song Contest, radio Horizont” – 3rd prize
 2004 – International Song Contest, Universetalent, Prague, Czech Republic – 3rd prize
 2004 – International Art and Music Festival – Nan Ning, China
 2004 – International Music Festival, Meet in Beijing, China
 2005 - International Pop Music Festival, Discovery Varna, Bulgaria - Best performance
 2005 – World Championships of Performing Arts, Los Angeles, CA – 1st prize and gold medal
 2005 – European Song Contest, Eurovision
 2006 – Blues to Bop festival, Lugano, Switzerland
 2006 - ''International Jazz Festival, Bansko, Bulgaria

Tours
1999: Bulgaria/Norway
2000: Bulgaria/Norway/Macedonia
2001: Bulgaria/Norway
2002: Bulgaria/Norway
2003: Bulgaria/Norway/China
2004: Bulgaria/China
2005: Bulgaria/South Korea
2006: Bulgaria/Switzerland
2007: Bulgaria
2008: Bulgaria/USA
2009: USA
2010: Bulgaria/USA/England/Ireland
2011: Bulgaria/USA
2012: USA

References

External links
The Official Duet Mania website
Duet Mania's YouTube Channel

Bulgarian pop music groups
Culture in Sofia