is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Masakazu Ishiguro. It has been serialized in Kodansha's Monthly Afternoon since January 2018.

Plot 
In the outside world, 15 years have passed since an unprecedented disaster, that completely destroyed modern civilization. A group of children live in a facility isolated from the outside world. One day, one of them, a girl named Tokio, receives a message that says "Do you want to go outside?" Mimihime, another girl who lives in the same facility, has a prediction and tells the upset Tokio that two people will come from the outside to save her, one of whom has her same face, while the director of the school tells her that the outside world is hell. Meanwhile, a boy named Maru, who looks just like Tokio, is traveling through this devastated Japan with a girl named Kirko, in search of heaven.

Publication
Heavenly Delusion is written and illustrated by Masakazu Ishiguro. It has been serialized in Kodansha's seinen manga magazine Monthly Afternoon since January 25, 2018.<ref></p></ref> Kodansha has collected its chapters into individual tankōbon volumes. The first volume was released on July 23, 2018. A promotional video directed by Tasuku Watanabe for the first volume was released on July 23, 2018. As of July 21, 2021, six volumes have been released.

In North America, the series is licensed for English language release by Denpa. The first volume was released on December 31, 2019.

Volume list

Reception
The first volume of the manga had 130,000 copies in circulation as of December 2018. Heavenly Delusion ranked #1 on Takarajimasha's Kono Manga ga Sugoi! 2019 ranking of Top 20 manga series for male readers. In December 2019, Brutus magazine listed Heavenly Delusion on their "Most Dangerous Manga" list, which included works with the most "stimulating" and thought-provoking themes. Heavenly Delusion was one of the Jury Recommended Works at the 24th Japan Media Arts Festival in 2021.

See also
And Yet the Town Moves — Another manga series by the same author.

References

Further reading

External links
 

Adventure anime and manga
Kodansha manga
Mystery anime and manga
Science fiction anime and manga
Seinen manga