"Jesus Is the One (I Got Depression)" is a 2019 comedy hip hop song with rap vocals from Zack Fox and produced by Kenny Beats. Created in a freestyle rap session, the song went viral and has amassed 35.5 million streams in the United States on Spotify, topping the platform's US Viral Chart.

Composition 
"Jesus Is the One (I Got Depression)" is the second collaboration between Fox and Kenny Beats after their 2018 song "Square Up". The song was produced on the fifth episode of Kenny Beats' YouTube series The Cave, where he invites rappers into the studio to record a freestyle rap and creates a instrumental to go with it. On this episode, Fox requested "a beat that sound[s] like Runescape mixed with Jodeci mixed with almond milk mixed with domestic violence... Make me a pro-lifer beat. Make me a Bernie bro beat. Make me a post-9/11, pre-death of Whitney Houston-style beat." While rapping, Fox pulls down his pants and wears a top hat and wrap-around sunglasses. His lyrics are equally as bizarre and nonsensical: Fox says people with mental illnesses should "turn up", preemptively mourns the death of Betty White (as he knows "it's coming up" – she would pass away about two and a half years later), calls to free Palestine and Tay-K, and more.

Reception 
The song was not intended for commercial release, but after it went viral, the duo decided to release an official version in June 2019. As of June 2021, the original YouTube video has surpassed over 14 million views, and the song also has more than 34.3 million streams on Spotify. TikTok also contributed to the song's fame.

Despite its popularity, both artists were bemused with the song's fame. In an interview with Rolling Stone, Fox said: "Is it that people want something this meaningless, or is it that everything is already so meaningless that this fits right in? [Hip hop] is so broken right now I bet someone could literally troll their way to the top." In an interview with Genius, Kenny Beats said that "this song is bigger than all the serious shit I'm working on. It's TikTok's fault. It's Zack's fault."

External links

References 

2019 songs
Comedy rap songs
Music memes
Viral videos