Mickey Mania: The Timeless Adventures of Mickey Mouse is a 1994 platform video game developed by Traveller's Tales and published by Sony Imagesoft for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Sega Genesis, and Sega CD. In the game, the player controls Mickey Mouse, who must navigate through various side-scrolling levels, each designed and based from classical Mickey Mouse cartoons. The game was later released on the PlayStation in 1996 as Mickey's Wild Adventure. A second game, Mickey Mania 2, was intended to be released, but was canceled because Traveller's Tales was focusing on developing Toy Story.

Gameplay
Mickey Mania is a platformer in which players control Mickey Mouse as he visits various locations based on his past cartoons, ranging from his debut in Steamboat Willie to the more recent The Prince and the Pauper. Mickey can attack enemies by either jumping on them or by using a limited supply of marbles, which are collected throughout the level. Mickey can take up to five hits, represented by the fingers he holds up on his hand, which can be replenished by collecting stars, whilst extra lives can be gained by finding Mickey hats. Levels offer a variety of challenges such as puzzles the player must solve, escaping from a rampaging moose and fleeing from a flaming staircase.

The levels in the game are based from the following classic Mickey Mouse cartoons:
 Steamboat Willie (1928)
 The Mad Doctor (1933)
 The Band Concert (1935) (not included in the SNES version)
 Moose Hunters (1937)
 Lonesome Ghosts (1937)
 Mickey and the Beanstalk (1947)
 The Prince and the Pauper (1990)

Development
Originally, Mickey Mania was planned to be released to coincide with Mickey's 65th birthday in 1993. However, as that would have only allowed for six months to develop the game, this idea was soon scrapped in favor of the more compelling concept of Mickey traveling back in time to his own original classic cartoons and subsequently recreating the events of the aforementioned shorts in the process. The game pays tribute to Mickey's early cartoon career.

The success of Mickey Mania led to the development of a sequel which would later be canceled so that Traveller's Tales could instead focus on developing a game based on the then-upcoming film Toy Story. The game was the debut project of game designer David Jaffe.

Version differences
The SNES version is missing the hidden Band Concert level, the staircase sequence in the Mad Doctor level, a few special effects, some of Pluto's appearances, and some level-ending sequences. It also adds loading time screens in between each area. The Sega CD and PSX versions extend the ending to the Mad Doctor level, showing that the Mad Doctor had regressed to a baby, and adds a sequence near the end of the Prince and the Pauper level wherein Mickey must find pencils to call upon the other Mickeys from the six main levels to attack Pete, as well as giving Mickey extensive dialogue relevant to situations throughout the game. The Genesis version lacks the hidden area near the end of the first level. The PlayStation version enhances the graphics (all sprites are remade, the staircase sequences are rendered in 3D, and in the Mad Doctor level, crates occasionally come from behind which Mickey has to dodge) and adds a sequence at the end of the Mickey and the Beanstalk level where Mickey must run away from Willie the Giant. Willie makes no appearance in any of the other game versions despite being mentioned in the manuals of all four versions.

Both Sega CD and PlayStation versions utilize a CD-based soundtrack composed by Andy Blythe and Marten Joustra with additional music by Michael Giacchino.

Reception
On release, Famicom Tsūshin scored the Super Nintendo version of the game 28 out of 40, giving the Genesis version 30 out of 40. GamePro gave the Genesis version a mixed review. They particularly applauded the visual style and the motif of playing inside old cartoons, commenting that "the blend of past and present is magical", but they criticized that the game is too easy and concluded that "if Mickey's not your thing, you won't appreciate this cart. But if you liked any of Mickey's other games, you won't miss with Mickey Mania". The same reviewer later covered the Sega CD version. He praised its improved graphics, additional voice samples, and new level, but again concluded that the game is too easy to appeal to anyone who isn't a Mickey Mouse fan. A different GamePro reviewer covered the SNES version, and in contrast found that the game's difficulty was too high for younger gamers, but praised the responsive controls and sharp graphics.

Maximum gave the PlayStation version two out of five stars. They praised the graphical stylistics, attention to detail, and solid gameplay, but criticized that the action never builds in intensity or pays off, and the game makes no noticeable improvements over the earlier, last generation versions of the game. They nonetheless held it to be far better than the other 2D platformer then on the PlayStation, Johnny Bazookatone.

Next Generation reviewed the Sega CD version of the game, rating it four stars out of five, and stated that "there's just enough innovation here [...] to make it a must, and if you've got kids, I think it's the law".

Next Generation reviewed the Genesis version of the game, rating it four stars out of five: "Ingenious action like Mickey carefully mixing a potion while being attacked from every side, makes it hard to put down".

The game won the 1994 Parents' Choice Award. VideoGames magazine awarded it Best Sega CD Game. In 2018, Complex ranked the game 49 on their The Best Super Nintendo Games of All Time writing: "A great game and a history lesson in all things Mickey Mouse: Mickey Mania was a fantastic title that fully utilized the broad color palate of the SNES. Walt Disney would be proud."

References

External links
 

1994 video games
Cancelled Windows games
Mickey Mouse video games
Disney video games
Platform games
PlayStation (console) games
PlayStation Network games
Sega CD games
Sega Genesis games
Side-scrolling video games
Super Nintendo Entertainment System games
Traveller's Tales games
Epic/Sony Records games
Video games about time travel
Video games scored by Michael Giacchino
Video games developed in the United Kingdom
Video games scored by Andy Blythe and Marten Joustra