Miss Birmanie désigne les concours de beauté féminine destinés aux jeunes femmes de Birmanie, également appelée Myanmar.

Histoire
Avant la création de Miss Myanmar ou du concours Miss Univers Myanmar, ce concours avait pour nom Miss Burma. Il débute au Myanmar en 1959 avec le nom Burma. De 1959 à 1961, le Myanmar participe au concours Miss Univers. Depuis 1962, le concours national a été banni par le gouvernement pour des raisons inconnues.

En 2013, Daw Soe Yu Wai venant d'une organisation de médias locaux se rend à New York afin d'obtenir une licence de Miss Univers. Elle y fit également une déclaration pour le Myanmar en revenant à Miss Univers. Son interview avec l'ancienne Miss Univers Olivia Culpo fut en vedette sur VOA Burmese, où la reportère Kaye Lin anima l'interview en tant que traductrice.

Miss Universe Myanmar 2013
Moe Set Wine competed in Miss Universe Myanmar 2013 which was held on October 3, 2013 at the National Theatre in Yangon. The competition was organized by the Hello Madam Media Group. This competition was held for the first time since 1961. She won Miss Perfect Skin and Miss Famous titles, voted by fans through the Internet voting system and SMS messages. She became the winner of Miss Universe Myanmar 2013 after the competition. She was the first woman to represent the country in the competition since 1961.

Titleholders

Winner
The winner of Miss Myanmar represents her country at the Miss Universe. On occasion, when the winner does not qualify (due to age) for either contest, a runner-up is sent. Since 2013 the name has been changed as Myanmar. Before the name will be using at the pageant, Burma has already used in 1959-1961 era.
In 2015, Miss Universe Myanmar Organization crowned two winners, they will compete in Miss Universe 2015 and Miss Universe 2016.

First Runner-up
The second placed of Miss Myanmar goes to Miss Grand International began in 2017. The winning title will be Stop of War ambassador and get full travel to upcoming Miss Grand International contest.

Second Runner-up
The third placed of Miss Myanmar goes to Miss Intercontinental began in 2018.

Third Runner-up 
The fourth placed of Miss Myanmar goes to Face of Beauty International began in 2018.

Fourth Runner-up 
The fifth placed of Miss Myanmar does not go to International pageant. The winning title will be an ambassador of Myanmar.

International pageants

Miss Universe

Miss Grand International

Miss Intercontinental

Face of Beauty International

World Beauty Queen

Miss United Continents

Winner Gallery

Notes et références

Voir aussi 

Miss Univers
Miss Monde
Miss Terre
Miss International

Birmanie
Culture birmane