Persecutory delusions are a set of delusional conditions in which the affected persons believe they are being persecuted, despite a lack of evidence. Specifically, they have been defined as containing two central elements:
 the individual thinks that harm is occurring, or is going to occur.
 the individual thinks that the perceived persecutor has the intention to cause harm.

According to the DSM-IV-TR, persecutory delusions are the most common form of delusions in paranoid schizophrenia, where the person believes "he or she is being tormented, followed, tricked, spied on, or ridiculed", or that their food is being poisoned. They are also often seen in schizoaffective disorder and, as recognized by DSM-IV-TR, constitute the cardinal feature of the persecutory subtype of delusional disorder, by far the most common. Delusions of persecution may also appear in manic and mixed episodes of bipolar disorder, polysubstance abuse, and severe depressive episodes with psychotic features, particularly when associated with bipolar illness.

A 2020 study by Sheridan et. al. gave figures for lifetime prevalence of perceived stalking by groups, a common form of persecutory delusion, at 0.66% for adult women and 0.17% for adult men.

Legal aspects 
When the focus is to remedy some injustice by legal action, persecutory delusions are sometimes called "querulous paranoia".

In cases where reporters of stalking behavior have been judged to be making false reports, a majority of them were judged to be delusional.

Treatment
Medications for schizophrenia are often used, especially when positive symptoms are present.  Both first-generation antipsychotics and second-generation antipsychotics may be useful.  Cognitive behavioral therapy has also been used.

See also

Stalking#False claims of stalking, "gang stalking" and delusions of persecution
Grandiose delusions
Mentalism (discrimination)
Narcissistic decompensation
Paranoia
 In object relations theory see: splitting (psychology), paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions, and paranoid anxiety
Querulant
Social stigma (see current research on people diagnosed with psychiatric illness)
Victim playing

References

Paranoia
Schizophrenia
Delusional disorders