Kevin Neil Whitrick (17 August 1964 – 21 March 2007) was a British electrical engineer.
Whitrick's death was highly publicised for his live, online webcast suicide.

Biography

Background 
Whitrick had been married to his wife Paula since 1988, and they had two children. At the time of his death, the marriage had broken down about two years prior, and he was living separately from his family. In 2006, Whitrick was severely injured in a car accident and suffered long-term health consequences.

Suicide 
On the day of his death, Whitrick was in a chatroom on PalTalk and was joined by about 60 other users in a special "insult" chatroom where people "have a go at each other". He stood on a chair, punched a hole in his ceiling and placed a rope around a joist, and then tied the other end around his neck, then stepped off the chair. Some people thought this was a prank, until his face started turning blue. Some people in the chat room egged him on while others tried desperately to find his address. A member in the room contacted the police, who arrived at the scene two minutes later. Kevin Whitrick was pronounced dead at 11:15 pm. GMT.

Aftermath 
The death was widely reported in the media. Concerns were raised over the possibility that it could inspire further suicides, as well as the webcam footage becoming available in perpetuity on the internet. Detectives traced about 100 chatroom users to question them about their role in the cyber suicide, though the Crown Prosecution Service did not pursue any criminal charges against them.

See also 
 Internet suicide
 Abraham Biggs, a 19-year-old man who also live-streamed his suicide 
 Nikki Catsouras photographs controversy 	
 List of people who died by suicide by hanging

References

External links 
 Appeal over webcam death images
 Chatroom user films his suicide on internet

1964 births
2007 suicides
Suicide of Kevin Whitrick
20th-century English people
21st-century English people
Deaths by person in England
English electrical engineers
Filmed suicides
Suicide of Kevin Whitrick
Online chat
People from Shrewsbury
Suicides by hanging in England