A suicide note or death note is a message left behind by a person who dies or intends to die by suicide.

A study examining Japanese suicide notes estimated that 25–30% of suicides are accompanied by a note. However, incidence rates may depend on ethnicity and cultural differences, and may reach rates as high as 50% in certain demographics. A suicide message can be in any form or medium, but the most common methods are by a written note, an audio message, or a video.

Reasons
Some fields of study, such as sociology, psychiatry and graphology, have investigated the reasons why people who complete or attempt suicide leave a note.

The most common reasons that people contemplating suicide choose to write a suicide note include one or more of the following:
To ease the pain of those known to the victim by attempting to dissipate guilt.
To increase the pain of survivors by attempting to create guilt.
To set out the reason(s) for suicide.
To express thoughts and feelings that the person felt unable to express in life.
To give instructions for disposal of the remains.
Occasionally, to confess acts of murder or some other offence.

Sometimes there is also a message in the case of murder-suicide, explaining the reason(s) for the murder(s), see for example, Marc Lépine's suicide statement and videotaped statements of the 7 July 2005 London bombers.

Notable people who left suicide notes
Desmond Amofah (2019)—American Internet personality who was known by his online alias "Etika". Prior to his disappearance on June 19, 2019, Amofah published what would be his final YouTube video simply titled "I'm sorry", in which he apologized for his manic behavior in the months prior to the video, admitting to having mental health issues. Alluding to suicidal thoughts in the video, Amofah said, "I hope that my story maybe helps to make YouTube a better place in the future where people know boundaries and limits and how far things should go." He also commented, "I mean, hey, two wrongs don't make a right, you know..." Although YouTube removed the video for violating its Community Guidelines, Amofah's fans reposted the video on other outlets.
Cheslie Kryst (2022)—American TV host, model and beauty queen from Miss USA 2019
Korechika Anami (1945)—"I - with my death—humbly apologize to the Emperor for the great crime." Historians are divided as to what crime he was referring. It is possibly a reference to his part in the aborted coup against the Emperor Hirohito in the hours following Japan's decision to surrender at the end of World War II.
Roger Angleton (1997?)—Murderer of and brother-in-law of the famous bookmaker Doris Angleton.
José Manuel Balmaceda (1891)—Chilean president. He wrote a lengthy political testament and committed suicide at the Argentine legation on his last day in office after the conservative opposition won the 1891 Civil War, rather than surrender to the new regime.
J. Clifford Baxter (2002)—Enron Corporation executive.
Clara Blandick (1962)—American film actress, most famous for playing Aunt Em in the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz. Her note began, "I am now about to make the great adventure".
Eustace Budgell (1737)—English writer: "What Cato did, and Addison approved, cannot be wrong." Joseph Addison was Budgell's cousin.
Kevin Carter—South African photojournalist. He wrote, "I'm really, really sorry. The pain of life overrides the joy to the point that joy does not exist... depressed... without phone... money for rent... money for child support... money for debts... money!!!... I am haunted by the vivid memories of killings & corpses & anger & pain... of starving or wounded children, of trigger-happy madmen, often police, of killer executioners... I have gone to join Ken if I am that lucky."
Leslie Cheung—Hong Kong actor and musician who suffered from clinical depression.
Eduardo Chibás—Cuban politician and radio celebrity, killed himself during the broadcast of his programme, making his speech during it a kind of oral suicidal note, protesting against the widespread corruption of the Batista dictatorship.
Christine Chubbuck—American anchor of WWSB (then known as WXLT-TV) in Sarasota, Florida who committed suicide during a newscast.
Kurt Cobain—Lead singer of Nirvana. The note is addressed to his childhood imaginary friend and gives his reasons for leaving Nirvana, followed by a message to his wife, Courtney Love, and to his daughter, Frances Bean Cobain. The note made reference to Freddie Mercury and quoted the line "It's better to burn out than to fade away" from the song "Hey Hey, My My" from Neil Young's album Rust Never Sleeps.
Ida Craddock—Facing prison in 1902 for sending through the U.S. Mail sexually explicit marriage manuals she had authored, Craddock penned a lengthy public suicide note to her readers condemning Anthony Comstock, sponsor of the Comstock Act under which she was convicted.
Ian Curtis—Lead singer of Joy Division. In the early hours of 18 May 1980, Curtis hanged himself in the kitchen of his house at 77 Barton Street, Macclesfield. He had just viewed Werner Herzog's film Stroszek and listened to Iggy Pop's The Idiot.
Adam Czerniaków—Head of the Judenrat in the Warsaw Ghetto. He refused to help round up Jews and committed suicide on July 23, 1942 by swallowing a cyanide pill, a day after the commencement of mass extermination of Jews known as the Grossaktion Warsaw. He left his wife a note that read: "They are demanding that I kill the children of my people with my own hands. There is nothing for me to do but to die." His other note to one of his fellow members of the Judenrat, explained: "I can no longer bear all this. My act will prove to everyone what is the right thing to do."
Dalida—Popular French singer. She wrote, "La vie m'est insupportable. Pardonnez moi" ("Life has become unbearable ... forgive me.")
Brad Delp—Lead vocalist of the rock band Boston who left the following note: "Mr. Brad Delp. "J'ai une âme solitaire". I am a lonely soul."
T. E. Dunville—English music hall performer; suffering depression, he drowned himself in 1924, leaving his wife a note including the words "I feel I cannot bear it any longer."
R. Budd Dwyer—Pennsylvania politician who, during a recorded televised news conference, read a prepared statement and then shot himself.
George Eastman—Inventor of 35 mm film and founder of Eastman Kodak. His note simply read, "To my friends: my work is done. Why wait? G.E."
Lee Eun-ju—South Korean actress. She left a suicide note scrawled in blood, in which she wrote, "Mom, I am sorry and I love you." A separate note said, "I wanted to do too much. Even though I live, I'm not really alive. I don't want anyone to be disappointed. Money is not everything, but the world is suffering because of it."
Justin Fashanu—gay English soccer player, charged with sexual assault in Maryland. His suicide note denied the charges, stating that the sex was consensual, and that he had fled to England because he felt he could not get a fair trial because of his homosexuality, and it added "I realised that I had already been presumed guilty. I do not want to give any more embarrassment to my friends and family."
James Forrestal—Former United States Secretary of Defense and Secretary of the Navy who fell from a sixteenth-floor window at Bethesda Naval Hospital. There were conspiracy theories about his death; his possible suicide note was a quotation from the play Ajax by Sophocles: "Frenzy hath seized thy dearest son, / Who from thy shores in glory came / The first in valor and in fame; / Thy deeds that he hath done / Seem hostile all to hostile eyes.... / Better to die, and sleep / The never waking sleep, than linger on, / And dare to live, when the soul's life is gone."
Vince Foster— Deputy White House Counsel during the first few months of U.S. President Bill Clinton's administration, and also a law partner and friend of Hillary Clinton. A suicide note of sorts, in actuality a draft resignation letter, was found torn into 27 pieces in his briefcase. The letter contained a list of complaints, specifically including, "The WSJ editors lie without consequence" and lamenting, "I was not meant for the job or the spotlight of public life in Washington. Here ruining people is considered sport."
Misao Fujimura—high school student studying philosophy who wrote the suicide note on a tree; the suicide resulted in many copycat suicides (see Werther effect).
Romain Gary—French writer. He wrote a suicide note explaining the reasons of his suicide and then shot himself in the mouth. Apart from his suicide note, he had stated: "I really had fun. Goodbye and thank you."
Charlotte Perkins Gilman—American humanist and writer who took chloroform while dying of breast cancer. Her suicide note read in part, "When all usefulness is over, when one is assured of an unavoidable and imminent death, it is the simplest of human rights to choose a quick and easy death in place of a slow and horrible one."
Pete Ham—Leader of the rock group Badfinger. Ham's note blamed the group's manager for his financial ruin, calling him "...a soulless bastard. I will take him with me."
Tony Hancock—British comedian, who died in 1968. Suicide note included the line "Things just seemed to go too wrong, too many times".
Mitchell Heisman, a 35-year-old who held a bachelor's degree in psychology from Albany University. His suicide note was notable due to its unconventional format; at 1,905 pages, spanning topics concerning (and not limited to) human nature, society, religion, technology, and science, the suicide "note" was more akin to a grand philosophical tome. Heisman published his book, Suicide Note, online for free download within a day of finally shooting himself on the Harvard University campus.
Rudolf Hess—Nazi war criminal who committed suicide in Spandau Prison. "Thanks to the directors for addressing this message to my home. Written several minutes before my death."
Abbie Hoffman—American political activist (de facto leader of the 1960s counter-culture) and author of Steal This Book, who gained infamy as part of the anti-Vietnam War protest trial Chicago Eight. He suffered from bipolar disorder, and died in April 1989.
Robert E. Howard—American writer and creator of Conan the Barbarian. Howard shot himself when his mother was in a coma prior to her death. His suicide note consisted of a quotation from "The House of Cæsar" by Viola Garvin: "All fled, all done / So lift me on the pyre. / The feast is over / And the lamps expire."
Kim Jong-hyun—South Korean singer-songwriter and main vocalist of the boy band Shinee. He had sent a note to a friend in which he wrote: "The depression that was slowly devouring me at last consumed me. ... What else can I say more. Just tell me I've done well. That this is enough." Following his death, his fans paid tribute to him on social media with the viral hashtag "#YouDidWellJonghyun", a reference to his final request in his note.
Hana Kimura—Japanese professional wrestler. Her final tweet read, "Nearly 100 frank opinions every day. I couldn't deny they hurt me. "Die", "you are disgusting", "you should disappear" I believed these things about myself more than they did. Thank you, Mother, for the gift of life. My whole life I wanted to be loved. Thank you to everyone who supported me. I love you all. I'm sorry for being weak." She also posted her last Instagram post before she died. It reads as follows: "Good-bye. I love you, have fun and live a long time. I'm sorry."
Jerzy Kosiński—Polish-American novelist. He wrote, "I am going to put myself to sleep now for a bit longer than usual. Call it Eternity."
Martin Manley (1953–2013)—American sports writer and statistician, who worked for the Kansas City Star. To cut short his perceived ongoing descent into dementia, he committed suicide on his 60th birthday in the parking lot of a police station, shooting himself while still on the phone with 911 informing them of the act. Manley spent over a year preparing an extensive website outlining the rationale behind his suicide. While Yahoo soon took it offline, citing a violation of its TOS, mirrors of the entire site are still available (Yahoo also shut down Manley's sports blog, SportsInReview.com, which was not re-created).
Yukio Mishima—Japanese writer. His suicide note explained his reasons for attempting to incite mutiny amongst the Japanese Self-Defense Forces.
John Noble—Las Vegas resident who left a 270-page note with a table of contents and a 2-hour DVD before shooting himself at the M Resort buffet after having a "free buffet for life" prize rescinded by the resort due to his subsequent behavior there.
Per Yngve "Dead" Ohlin—Lead singer of the black metal group Mayhem, whose suicide note famously read, in part, "Excuse all the blood" and included an apology for the loud gunshot.
Freddie Prinze—American actor and comedian, famous for his role on the sitcom Chico and the Man. He is the father of Freddie Prinze Jr.
Elliot Rodger—Mass murderer behind the 2014 Isla Vista massacre. He left behind a 108,000-word memo entitled My Twisted World and an eight-minute YouTube video describing what he was about to do.
Roh Moo-hyun—9th President of South Korea, who jumped from a cliff behind his home in Bongha Village. The note expressed his remorse to the people: "I am in debt to so many people. I have caused too great a burden to be placed upon them. I can't begin to fathom the countless agonies down the road. The rest of my life would only be a burden for others. I am unable to do anything because of poor health. I can't read, I can't write. Do not be too sad. Isn't life and death all a part of nature? Do not be sorry. Do not feel resentment toward anyone. It is fate. Cremate me. And leave only a small tombstone near home. I've thought on this for a long time." ()
Edmund Ruffin—Virginia planter and slaveowner who committed suicide in June 1865, shortly after the South's defeat in the American Civil War. His final diary entry before his suicide concluded, "And now with my latest writing and utterance, and with what will be near my latest breath, I here repeat and would willingly proclaim my unmitigated hatred to yankee rule – to all political, social and business connections with Yankees, and the perfidious, malignant and vile Yankee race."
George Sanders—Academy Award-winning British actor. One of his two suicide notes stated: "Dear world, I am leaving because I am bored. I feel I have lived long enough. I am leaving you with your worries in this sweet cesspool — good luck."
Elliott Smith—Singer/songwriter who suffered from addiction and depression. The note, according to the coroner, read "I'm so sorry—love, Elliot. God forgive me." The misspelling of the name is believed to be the fault of the coroner, but it is still unclear whether it was a suicide or not.
Mark Speight (2008)— British television presenter. Speight committed suicide by hanging near London Paddington station in April 2008. He had been consumed with grief following the death of his fiancée Natasha Collins from a cocaine overdose in January of that year. He left two suicide notes (of which one was found in his pocket, and the other at his home) saying that he could no longer live without Collins.
Randy Stair—Supermarket worker who shot three of his colleagues dead and then killed himself, after barricading the store. Stair was an aspiring animator and YouTuber (under the pseudonym "Andrew Blaze") who was obsessed with mass shootings (in particular the Columbine massacre) and the character Ember McLain from the Nickelodeon animated series Danny Phantom; he was also conflicted about his gender identity and wrote in his journal: "I'm a girl who’s been trapped in a man's body". Stair posted extensive online documents and "suicide tapes" suggesting the killings were something he had planned out meticulously over a number of months.

Pál Teleki—Former Prime Minister of Hungary, who committed suicide on 3 April 1941, while he received a call that is thought to have advised him that the German army had just started its march into Hungary to invade Yugoslavia. He wrote his suicide note to Head of State and Regent Miklós Horthy.
Hunter S. Thompson—Author of Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas and creator of gonzo journalism.
Lisandro de la Torre—Argentinian lawyer, politician and senator who fought against the conservative government's corrupt officers during the "Década Infame" (Infamous Decade) of the 1930s. Finally, abandoned by his allies and believing his struggle to be lost, he committed suicide, leaving a note describing the desperate situation he was in.
Getúlio Vargas—Brazilian president (1930–1945; 1950–1954) who used his suicide and suicide note (the "Carta Testamento") as a political weapon against his enemies.
Mike Von Erich—Wrestler who committed suicide after thinking that he was not as good as he had been prior to a shoulder injury. His brothers Kerry and Chris also committed suicide.
David Foster Wallace—Award-winning American novelist, short story writer, and essayist who left a two-page note and neatly arranged the manuscript for The Pale King before hanging himself on the patio. 
Keith Wayne—Stage name for Ronald Keith Hartman, an actor known for his only role as Tom in the 1968 cult horror movie Night of the Living Dead. He later became a chiropractor and wrote a column called Chiropractic Corner in Hardgainer magazine under his real name. His last column (in Hardgainer issue #40) had an unusual combination of medical advice and a suicide note as evidenced by its title How to Find Chiropractic Help, Bursitis and Tendinitis, Sternum Noises, Knee and Neck Care; plus the Notice of the Death of Dr. Hartman.
Bob Welch—Fleetwood Mac guitarist/vocalist from 1971 to 1974.
Wendy O. Williams—Lead singer of American punk band Plasmatics who left the following suicide note: "I don't believe that people should take their own lives without deep and thoughtful reflection over a considerable period of time."
Virginia Woolf—English feminist author and poet. Her suicide note iterated that she feared she was on the brink of what would have been the latest in a series of breakdowns, and that she would rather die than endure another such episode. Her note concluded with a message to her husband, Leonard Woolf, telling him that she loved him and thanking him for the time they had together, stating: "I don’t think two people could have been happier than we have been."
Bill Zeller—American programmer and creator of myTunes, who suffered with the traumatic and existential effects of child sexual abuse, and who requested that his suicide note should be widely circulated online in its entirety.

See also

Death poem
Last words
Will and testament

References

External links

A collection of suicide notes and letters
Famous suicide notes—dying words of famous people
The Presentation of the Self in Suicide Notes by David Lester & Bijou Yang

Letters (message)
Note