Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League is an upcoming action-adventure video game developed by Rocksteady Studios and published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment. It is set to be released in 2022 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S. It is a continuation of the Batman: Arkham series and will be the first game in the series not to feature Batman as the title character or the player protagonist. The game revolves around the titular team of super-criminals, who are assembled by Amanda Waller and sent to Metropolis to stop the alien invader Brainiac and kill the members of the Justice League who have been brainwashed by him.

Gameplay 
Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League is a genre-bending action-adventure game set in an open world based on Metropolis. The game features four playable characters: Captain Boomerang, Deadshot, Harley Quinn, and King Shark. While it can be played solo, the game also features a four-player cooperative multiplayer mode. When played solo, players can switch between characters at will, while the other characters are controlled by the AI.

Premise 
The game is set in the universe previously established by the Batman: Arkham series, taking place sometime after the events of Batman: Arkham Knight. Amanda Waller (Debra Wilson) creates a task force known as the Suicide Squad, which is composed of Arkham Asylum inmates Harley Quinn (Tara Strong), Captain Boomerang, Deadshot and King Shark (Samoa Joe), for a covert mission in Metropolis. Only when they arrive in the city do they realize the severity of the situation: Brainiac has invaded Earth and has started brainwashing its inhabitants, including the Justice League members Superman, Flash (Scott Porter) and Green Lantern, with Wonder Woman as the only apparent member who is not under Brainiac's control. Unable to depend on any hero for help, it is up to the Suicide Squad to save the world by assassinating the Justice League and stopping Brainiac.

Development 
A "hardcore violent" video game based on the Suicide Squad was first announced by then DC Comics chief creative officer Geoff Johns in July 2010. In February 2012, he elaborated that the game was in development, adding that "Because of the concept, you have a game where any of the lead characters can conceivably die and it's not a stunt. Some really cool story could come out of that." The formation of the Suicide Squad was teased at the end of Batman: Arkham Origins in 2013 – developed by WB Games Montreal – which featured a post-credits scene in which Deathstroke is asked by Amanda Waller to join the team, and in Batman: Arkham Origins Blackgate, in which Deadshot and Bronze Tiger join the team with Bane under consideration. In the years since Batman: Arkham Knight was released, there have been rumours suggesting that WB Games Montreal was working on a Suicide Squad game, but no official announcement was made from the development team or publisher. In December 2016, Jason Schreier from Kotaku revealed that the title was cancelled.

Rocksteady Studios announced Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League in August 2020. Rocksteady, the creator of the Batman: Arkham franchise, was initially rumored to be working on a Superman-themed game, which they later debunked. The first trailer for the game premiered at DC FanDome on August 22, 2020. As the game is set in the "Arkhamverse", plot threads established in the Batman: Arkham series would continue in Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League. The Los Angeles-based company Unbroken Studios are assisting Rocksteady in the developing of the game.

Release 
Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League is set to be released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 5, and Xbox Series X/S in 2022.

Notes

References

External links 
 

Action-adventure games
Alien invasions in video games
Batman: Arkham
Fiction about mind control
Multiplayer and single-player video games
Open-world video games
PlayStation 5 games
Science fiction video games
Suicide Squad
Superhero video games
Unreal Engine games
Upcoming video games scheduled for 2022
Video games based on DC Comics
Video games based on Justice League
Video games developed in the United Kingdom
Video games directed by Sefton Hill
Video games featuring female protagonists
Video games set in the United States
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment games
Windows games
Xbox Series X and Series S games