The Suicide Sessions is the sixth studio album by American punk rock musician GG Allin, released shortly before his arrest in September 1989.

The album was originally released on cassette in 1989, and rereleased in 1991 on Awareness Records alongside Allin's 1987 album You Give Love a Bad Name. The album was rereleased in 1997 on CD along with Allin's live album Anti-Social Personality Disorder – Live.

According to GG's frequent collaborator Mark Sheehan, they recorded "The Suicide Sessions" at his grandmother's house on East Merrimack Street, Lowell, MA. August–September, 1988. Sheehan said, "she loved to visit us while we've recorded this songs and really got interested in GG's persona and his dark humorous lyrics. He was pretty nice with her."

Allin later recalled: “The days were hot and nasty. I woke up in a pool of my own piss, sweating and stinking in my room in some seedy dive in Manchester, NH. Body odor, booze and death were always in the surrounding air. Tracy ´[his girl friend] was in intensive care because of a suicide attempt...so was Jo Ann... For me death was around every corner. I went looking for it at any cost. Mark came by to pick me up one day to go to Lowell, Mass to record. What came out of these recordings were the Suicide Sessions... But on this tape you will hear the first blood of the recordings. The ones that never made the tape...or were rejected I'm not sure... So for hours Mark and I bashed and bled our very souls in a sweaty attack as I poured my interiors into every fucking breath. This is the outcome..."

At Allin's funeral in 1993, his brother Merle put a pair of headphones onto Allin's head, hooked to a portable cassette player which was playing this album.

Track listing
Although listed in the track listing, the song "Kiss Me in the Gutter" does not appear on this album. It would later be released first as a B-Side to "No Room" (both songs rejects from this album) and later as its own single.

Personnel
GG Allin - vocals (credited as "vocals, drugs, and abuse")
Mark Sheehan - guitar
Erik Mercier - bass guitar
Greg Gonarea - drums
Beth Burrow - credited as "victim"

References

External links
GG Allin discography

1989 albums
Homestead Records albums
Awareness Records albums
GG Allin albums