Amy Jayne "Dolly" Everett (1 May 2003 – 3 January 2018) was an Australian teenager who died by suicide after becoming the victim of cyberbullying.

Everett was from Katherine in the Northern Territory and was attending Scots PGC College in the Queensland town of Warwick.  Everett had previously been the face of an advertising campaign for Australian hat company Akubra.

Reactions
Dolly Everett's death prompted tributes and reactions from ex Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, Australian boxer Jeff Horn and American entertainer Bette Midler, among others.  Memorial services for Everett were held in both Katherine and Warwick on 12 January 2018.  Mourners at the services were encouraged to wear something blue, Dolly Everett's favourite color. Following her death, Everett's parents launched a social media campaign using the hashtag #DoItForDolly to raise awareness of the effects of bullying, prompting a national discussion in Australia about the issue. They launched a foundation called the Dolly's Dream Foundation with support from the Alannah and Madeline Foundation.  The family also shared a drawing by Everett, depicting a figure underneath the words "stand up, speak even if your voice shakes", a quote which has since been used to encourage young bullying victims to speak up about their experiences.  In the three months since a GoFundMe page was created for Dolly's Dream Foundation, over $106,000 was raised.  A number of community events and fundraising initiatives have been held across Australia to raise money for the foundation.

Criticism
Although there was an outpouring of sympathy for Everett's family, the media were criticised for over-simplifying Everett's suicide, with some doubts expressed about whether bullying alone caused her death.  Professor Peter Jones from Bond University said that while bullying may have played a role in Everett's death, he believed she had a severe mental illness such as depression, which caused her to reach the decision to die by suicide.  Jones believes the media were too quick to blame bullying as the unequivocal cause of Everett's death.  Jones also said apportioning blame to bullies could lead them to also die by suicide due to guilt and shame.

The Australian Government media initiative, "Mindframe", also raised a number of concerns about the way the media were covering the death of Dolly Everett. It criticised the media for sharing a memorial video released by Everett's family, suggesting that the promotion of such public memorials should be avoided, due to the risk it posed to those experiencing similar life circumstances, or who were having suicidal thoughts.  Mindframe also urged the media to stop implying Everett's suicide was preceded by bullying, or caused solely by it.

In the wake of Everett's death, there were also calls to ban or police social media apps known to be used for cyberbullying, such as Sarahah.  However, some commentators such as Ginger Gorman described the calls as knee-jerk reactions that would likely be ineffective and could potentially remove online support for bullying victims.  Other commentators viewed the substantial media interest and public outcry generated by Dolly Everett's death as an example of what they perceived to be an indifference to an ongoing youth suicide crisis among Aboriginal Australians, which attracts little media interest.

References 

Suicides in Queensland
Victims of cyberbullying