Fathima Latheef (; ; June 4, 2001 – November 9, 2019) was an Indian teenager and a first-year post-graduate humanities student at Indian Institute of Technology Madras who had committed suicide in her hostel room on 9 November 2019. Her family and others had alleged that she ended her life because she had been discriminated against on the basis of her religion. She had named three professors for her death. An enquiry by Central Bureau of Investigation is ongoing regarding the case.

Background 
Hailing from Randamkutty locality in Kilikollur neighborhood of Kollam, Kerala, she was raised in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia with her twin-sister Aysha Latheef by her business-man father Abdul Latheef and mother Sajitha. She attended Yara International School till 9th standard. Upon returning to India in 2015, she got enrolled at The Oxford School in Umayanalloor for one year till 10th and then pursued her higher education in a state-affiliated curriculum school. She got enrolled as first-year student of the humanities stream (five-year integrated MA programme) in Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras and was widely described as an intelligent and academically competent student. She had been accepted to Banaras Hindu University in Varanasi after winning the Humanities entrance exam. Her mother, on the other hand, was reluctant to send her to Varanasi because the newspapers were full of stories about mob lynchings in the northern states. She was the one who persuaded on her daughter accepting the IIT Madras offer. In barely four months, though, the dream had turned into a nightmare. On July 23, 2019, Fathima began her studies at the institute. Her parents reported that she felt the IIT campus atmosphere oppressive.

Suicide 
The 19-year-old first-year student was discovered hanging from the ceiling of her hostel room on November 9. According to the authorities, she may have attempted suicide the night before. Around 11 a.m. on November 9, IIT administration notified her family of her death. The body was taken to the Royapettah Government Hospital for a post-mortem and a charge of unnatural death was filed with the Chennai City Police (Kotturpuram).

The warden of the Hostel found Fathima's death around noon on November 9, 2019, and a security personnel broke her door open. According to the students, Fathima's hostel mates received a phone call from her family about 11.30 a.m., stating that she had been inaccessible on her phone since the morning. According to the students, the chief of wardens and the head of the humanities department helped the warden in dispersing students gathered at the hostel. In the absence of the police or any witnesses, students at the scene claimed that staff members investigated Fathima's room, which had become a crime scene by that time.

Communal discrimination 
Two days before her death, she told her father, Abdul Latheef, who was working in Saudi Arabia, through a videoconference conversation that her name revealed her Muslim origin, which her mother was worried about. Her father alleged immediately after his daughter's death that he had evidence to prove that Fathima was being harassed by some professors in the department of Humanities and Social Sciences. Her refused believe her suicide was due to academic pressure but instead said his daughter, a topper in the all India entrance examinations and in the class, could not commit suicide due to academic pressure.

Her father said that Fathima had previously talked openly about being harassed by the professor she had blamed in her notes. She had said he was a bad guy. She was scared about attending his classes. She didn't even go to get her mark sheet from him. Rather, her friend went out and got it for her. He further claimed that he suspected the professor was discriminating against Fathima because she had continuously excelled in all of her classes.

Three days after the incident, her father demanded a fair probe into the incident. He alleged that harassment and caste discrimination by the professors forced his daughter to take the extreme step. He also stated that they had retrieved a suicide note from Fathima's phone where she allegedly blamed three professors from her department for her death.

Her family members also alleged that she had faced communal discrimination from some teachers and students on the campus.

Inquiry 
There were rumours that Fathima had scored low marks in a certain subject and was thus upset. Apparently, Fathima had scored 13 out of 20 marks in an Internal Assessment in Logic but believed she deserved more. She had approached the Head of the department for a review. The professor reviewed it and sent the paper back the professor she had name on her phone, who had evaluated the paper. She was the topper in the paper; the student in second place in the test had scored 11 marks and the one in third place had scored 9. The professor had apparently asked Fathima to meet him on Monday, 11 November, but Fathima was found dead in her hostel room on Saturday. The family suspects something happened which had impacted Fathima drastically.

Suicide note 
When her twin sister Aysha had gone to the Kotturpuram Police Station, she found Fathima's phone on the table. Upon charging the phone, she noticed there was no lock and the aforementioned text was her home screen. This screenshot pinning blame on Professor Sudharshan Padmanabhan was then widely circulated on social media as the alleged suicide note. Another note purported to have been written by her was also circulated, which blames two other professors.  A suicide note on her mobile phone and tablet claimed the three professors had harassed her.

The Forensic Department confirmed the authenticity of the suicide note and other notes typed by Fathima. It was confirmed that Fathima had written the notes before she killed herself and that they were not edited by anybody else.

Central Crime Branch 
The Central Crime Branch in Chennai in November 2019 reportedly arrived at the conclusion that there was no evidence against the professors alleged to have instigated her to take her life.

Central Bureau of Investigation 
Her family and a delegation of MPs visited Union Home Minister Amit Shah and delivered over a memorandum signed by 41 MPs demanding a fair investigation, the case was forwarded to the CBI in November 2020. Her family raised several allegations following her death, citing the fact that the screensaver on her phone and notes saved on it had named the people responsible for her death. However, with the Kotturpuram police insisting that no suicide note had been found, her father claimed that the Tamil Nadu police were attempting to sabotage the inquiry.

The CBI has registered a First Information Report (FIR) based on the FIR registered by the Tamil Nadu police.

Reaction 
The students of Delhi University issued a statement demanding justice for Latif and condemned the alleged casteist and religious discrimination.

MK Stalin demanded a time-bound fair, transparent and independent probe into the matter. In a statement, he stated that it was a shame to hear the victim's mother say her daughter was belittled and subjected to stress. He also stated “It's time we avoid saffronisation of educational institutions.”

An autonomous student body at IIT-M, the Ambedkar Periyar Study Circle, published a statement condemning IIT-Madras' "brahminical hegemony". The group has demanded a "fair probe" into Fathima's death. Many students accused IIT-Madras of being "anti-Muslim", "anti-minority", and of discriminating against students from marginalized communities such as Adivasis, Other Backward Classes and Dalits.

“My college is a hostile space that stinks of elitism, casteism, classism, and most notably Islamophobia,” Alfiya, who is studying Humanities, said. “This university, especially the department of Humanities and Social Sciences, is rife with anti-Muslim and anti-caste sentiments,” she claimed, validating her claim. She stated that one of the staff members asked her, 'Why are Muslims and Christians labelled minorities when their populations are vast, yet Brahmins make up only 2% of the Indian population?'.

On 18 November 2019, students of the institute sat on a hunger strike demanding the management constitute an external expert panel to survey the overall mental well-being of students. They also demanded setting up a Grievance Redressal Cell for each department and conducting an internal probe into the allegations made by Fathima's family. The management accepted the first two demands and the students called off the strike. However, when the students met the director on 21 November, he told them the institute cannot form an internal probe committee as an investigation was already underway by the authorities.

References 

2019 suicides
Female suicides
Suicides by hanging in India